---
layout: post
title: La Palma 2026
subtitle:
author: Bart
categories: trips
banner:
  video: 
  loop: true
  volume: 0.0
  start_at: 0.0
  image: assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/2026_IMG_20260111_184134.jpg
  opacity: 0.75
  background: "#000"
  height: "100vh"
  min_height: "38vh"
  heading_style: "border: 2px solid white; padding: 0.125em 0.375em; display: inline-block; letter-spacing: 0.12em;"
  subheading_style: "color: gold"
image: assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/2026_IMG_20260111_184134.jpg
heading: "LA PALMA 2026"
subheading: ""
tags: trips 
top: 1
---



### Introduction

One of the smaller western Canary islands, La Palma is famed for its [volcanic activity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2021_Cumbre_Vieja_volcanic_eruption) and lush greenery. Steep mountains and a central volcanic crater have incited unique climate, as well as a wider array of biomes than one might expect for an island of its size. 

Our planned route across the volcanic spine of the island was scheduled to take approximately 4-5 days, which we planned to supplement with 2 additional days along the GR130 to take us back to Santa Cruz. The bulk of the route would have us skirting the Caldera de Taburiente, a 9km wide volcanic crater featuring steep drops down to its central valley. 

{% include gallery-grid.html folder="assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/lapalma_gallery" captions="The Crater|Volcanoes|Peak Camping|More Volcanoes" %}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/2026_IMG_20260111_184134.jpg" description="Caldera de Taburiente" full=true %}


### Trail

The traditional direction to walk the GR131 starts at the southern tip of the island, ending in the west. Our group chose instead to flip the route due to concerns about having to descend 2400m on the final day, though this did mean turning that into a brutal ascent with which to start.

With a total distance just under 100km, we had hoped to be able to complete the journey in 6-7 days, camping along the way.


<!-- Map Container -->
<div id="lapalma-map" style="height: 400px; width: 100%; margin: 20px 0; border-radius: 8px; box-shadow: 0 2px 10px rgba(0,0,0,0.1);"></div>

<!-- Leaflet CSS and JS -->
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.9.4/dist/leaflet.css" integrity="sha256-p4NxAoJBhIIN+hmNHrzRCf9tD/miZyoHS5obTRR9BMY=" crossorigin=""/>
<script src="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.9.4/dist/leaflet.js" integrity="sha256-20nQCchB9co0qIjJZRGuk2/Z9VM+kNiyxNV1lvTlZBo=" crossorigin=""></script>

<!-- Leaflet GPX Plugin -->
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/leaflet-gpx@1.7.0/gpx.min.js"></script>

<!-- Your GPX Map Script -->
<script src="/assets/js/gpx-map.js"></script>

<!-- Initialize This Map -->
<script>
initGPXMap('lapalma-map', '/assets/maps/La_palma_trail.gpx');
</script>

{% include elevation-profile.html id="lapalma-elevation" gpx="/assets/maps/La_palma_trail.gpx" %}

### Accommodation

Wildcamping is technically not allowed on most of the Canary islands, but largely tolerated if you stick to leave-no-trace. You will see early trail runners at or before sunrise however, so it's advisable to be packed up by dawn. For official campsites, you will require a permit that you need to register for beforehand.

We didn't see a huge amount of great camping spots along the way--many areas are quite rocky, steep, and exposed to wind. The wind especially can be a problem since the base temperature is 3-4C in January. Our campsites are marked on the trail map below.

There is a single refuge building along the way, with running water and wooden bunks to sleep on. It's a small stone house with a bedroom and basic living area. 







### Equipment

We didn't bring any specialist gear for this trip, but did need to pack for colder weather than expected. Even with several additional layers, nights were cold with stern mountain winds making it feel like <0C. Victor kindly donated some chemical hand warmers to myself and Glenn, which, when creatively placed, provided some relief.

### Water

Moreso than on previous trips, water was a point of worry on La Palma. There aren't any accessible natural sources of fresh water in the mountains, so you're largely dependent on public taps. We identified 4 possible water points on the route, and made sure to plan our days around being able to access water at least once daily. The water is usually non-potable, our group prefers using Aquatab purification tablets to purify.

We usually topped up with 3L at each water point, which ended up being more than enough. We verified the first three water points as being fully operational as of Jan 2026--we didn't need to use the fourth one.

### Food

Given that we had planned to resupply in Los Canarios, we brought along enough food for 4-5 days. Breakfast was an oat mix that we had prepared at home (just add boiling water and bonus fruit). It was our first time bringing a home-made variant of our favourite breakfast MRE, deemed a success to be brought for future trips.

For lunch, we ate bread with ham/cheese the first days, followed by MREs on days 3-4. Due to a linguistic cock-up at the supermarket I (bart) ended up accidentally buying the absolute lamborghini of spanish ham that cost 90 EUR/kg (it was delicious).

Dinner consisted of MREs, we decided not to try to cook this time around, and pack as light as possible given the unknowns and short planning time.

----------

### Journey
 
The squad assembled on T-1 at Tenerife Sud airport (TFS), ready to make for the coast and take the ferry to La Palma. After a quick stop in Los Cristianos to pick up camping gas (screw variant available) we were firmly asea. The mood was celebratory, we had made it! A night of sleep, hearty breakfast, and cross-island cab ride later, and we reached the starting point, Puerto de Tazacorte.


{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/2026_IMG_20260110_112033.jpg" description="Before" %}

#### Day 1

Starting from the beach at sea level, we set off. It was already noon--since my new walking sticks didn't arrive in time, I had to buy some at the only camping store we could find, which opened at 10:30. Not exactly the earliest of starts, but this would end up working in our favour later. 


Under the scalding sun, we trepidously set off for what would be a day of near constant climbing. The first 750m of altitude snake up a steep cliffside, followed by a series of progressively sparser residential neighbourhoods. On a mixture of well trodden path and asphalt, we quickly towered above the banana plantations and coastline and felt ourselves scale the rim of the crater.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260110_160117.jpg" description="Rapid Ascent" width="auto" %}


 We stopped for a quick lunch and water at the first tap point. Engorged and re-hydrated, we sallied forth--road gave way to pine straw, and lanterns to trees. The clouds on La Palma hang low and at around 1200m we broke through the cloud barrier, which to us felt like wading through a cool mist barrier.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260110_182657.jpg" description="Above the clouds" width="auto" %} 

All the while, temperatures continued to drop. With an estimated 3-5 degrees per 500m of altitude, and the sun low in the sky, short rests left sweat colder than desired. As night threatened to fall, we made the decision to camp at a decently flat (though not entirely wind-safe) spot, around 1700m.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260111_074105.jpg" description="Camp 1" %}

Even though our intention was to push further on the first day, the late start forced us to camp a bit earlier than expected. This ended up working out quite well, as we didn't end up seeing many great camp sites further along the route to the highest point the next day.

We're tired, but we don't really care, because the scenery is stunning. 

We wrapped up tight for the night--with stern winds, temperatures dropped to near freezing overnight, which led to a short and restless night for some of us, even though we were exhausted.



#### Day 2

A hearty cup of oats to start the day, and back to climbing. As the ascent continued, trees quickly grew sparse until the landscape was arid and rocky. With clear skies, we soon spied the white spherical cupolas of the [Roque de los Muchahos Observatory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roque_de_los_Muchachos_Observatory) in the distance. 

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260111_144550.jpg" description="Observatorio" %}

After a brutal (for me) final hundred meters, we pushed through to the highest point of the island, the Roque de los Muchahos, at 2,426m. After taking a second to catch our breaths and drink in the views of the crater, we took a moment to refill and purify our water, as well as have a bit of lunch. While human contact had so far been relatively sparse for the day (3-4 people all morning), the peak was absolutely crawling with retired German tourists. This provided for ample lunch entertainment as they squabbled with their indifferent busdrivers. Beware the crows--they WILL steal your chorizo if you're not paying attention.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/2026CROW.jpeg" description="menace" %}

We abandoned the retirees at the rock and set off once again, on a sweeping trail that wound us through a craggy landscape littered with futuristic-looking telescope arrays. As the day wore on, we didn't come across a huge amount of great camping spots. In the end we decided to post up on a neighbouring peak. At 2200m, it was likely to be colder than desired, but it provided good wind coverage, and some of the best views we could imagine.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/2026_IMG_20260111_184217.jpg" description="Camp 2" width="auto" %}




#### Day 3

Our previous night's campsite was basically on top of the trail, so we felt it necessary to get up at dawn to pack up quickly. With water on our minds we set out to reach the next tap by lunch, the sole fixed accommodation of the trail, the Refugio. 

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260111_151009.jpg" description="Following the rim of the Caldera" %}

Given our punishing encounters with steep inclines on the first two days, these gently undulating trails proved easy to tackle. Snaking us back and forth over the spine, we were treated to alternating  views of the inner crater and the eastern coastline. 

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260112_091112.jpg" description="Spine" %}

As we descended further, we once again broke through the cloud barrier. Rocky cliff paths abruptly gave way to a lush, misty forest. 

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260112_155657.jpg" description="Home of the Green Knight" %}

In hypnotized silence we sternly marched forth through this mystical landscape, our bodies tired and keen to reach camp to taste the coveted Carbonara flavoured MREs.

Our third campsite was on a large official picnic ground, with water and toilets (closed, after 17.00 sadly). We were the only overnighters on the whole site, which was a little spooky, but we were frankly too tired to care.


#### Day 4

Volcano day had arrived--we would be crossing through blackened sandy peaks of the volcanic hinterlands. We packed up early, imbibed a not insignificant quantity of oats, and set off for the last major ascent of the trip. 

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260114_095347.jpg" description="Mordor" %}

A gentle slope led us through a shady, spacious forest of pine. Soon the only greenery left was the rough dry shrubbery attempting to survive in dark volcanic sand. Mist faded in and out, providing an almost mordor-esque quality to the whole experience as we crossed the final crest of the caldera.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260113_105616.jpg" description="Mordor Plus" %}

 Looking over our shoulders we were treated to a full view of the rim of the cauldron, showing all that we had trampled underfoot in previous days!

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260113_095306.jpg" description="The road behind" %}

A final steep descent brought us straight down into Los Canarios, for some well deserved beers and a good night's rest.

#### Day 5

The final stretch of the GR131 loomed--the last 600m back down to sea level, at the southernmost point of the island.

 Leaving our bags in Los Canarios we took the gentle path down the hillside leading us to the lighthouse. As the froth of breaking waves became discernible, the salty sea air hinted that we were closing in on the finish line. 

 {% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260114_103352.jpg" description="Ocean in sight" %}



{% include image.html url="/assets/images/fulls/94lapalma/20260114_110218.jpg" description="Victory!" %}

That was it for the GR131--but we had planned to tack on a section of the GR130, as we weren't sure if it would be enough. Even though Glenn was fighting through a cold, we set off on the final 25km leg back to the port of Santa Cruz. 

Spending most of the afternoon on this trail however, we were disappointed to find that it largely followed major roads and urbanised areas. Even though this was meant to be one of the better sections of the trail, it couldn't hold a candle to the 131. With the team battered by illness, we cut the last section short by about 10km and took a bus back to the town, still feeling very satisfied with our coast-to-coast adventure.














